---
title: Game development
abstract: About game development abstract.
---

# Development environments for the Atari Lynx

Historically there have been three development environments that I know of:

- **Epyx development kit**  
  Original Epyx development kit with an Amiga 2000 machine**.
  Consists of special hardware and Amiga based development tools. This is unavailable to almost everyone and less practical in general.
- **newcc65 and BLL**  
  Consists of `newcc65`, a fork of the original cc65 for writing 6502 code in C, with an additional library for the Atari Lynx called `BLL` (**B**ehind **L**ynx **L**ines) by Bastian Schick.  
  Bastian has recently started modernizing his tooling which can be found on GitHub here: https://github.com/42Bastian/. In particular the repositories for `lyxass`, `sprpck`, `new_bll`, `lynx-encryption-tools` and `lynx_hacking` are of interest.
- **cc65**  
  The modern compiler suite for multi-targeting 6502-based consoles.  
  `cc65` is still in active development and seems the more versatile toolset as it also targets around 20+ other consoles. The source code can be found on GitHub at https://github.com/cc65/cc65.  
  **Note:** this is a different version from the `cc65` that led to `newcc65`



# Setting up cc65

cc65 requires certain environment variables to be set for the C compiler, assembler and linker. 

|Variable|Location|
|:---|:---|
|`CC65_HOME`|cc65 root|
|`CC65_INC`|cc65/include|
|`CA65_INC`|cc65/asminc|
|`LD65_CFG`|cc65/cfg|
|`LD65_LIB`|cc65/lib|
|`LD65_OBJ`|cc65/obj|

Typically, the root or installation location for cc65 is `C:\Program Files\cc65` for Windows and `/usr/share/cc65` for Linux distributions.

You can set 