---
title: Epyx Development Kits
abstract: A look at the original Epyx development kits used to create Atari Lynx games using official hardware and tools from Epyx and Atari.
---

# Epyx development kit
The original games were made with the Epyx development kit and used additional hardware during the development phase. The development workstation was a Commodore Amiga 2000 with the Epyx development kit installed. The Amiga 2000 was connected to a special Atari Lynx, allowing the upload of games directly to the console from the workstation. 

There were two sets of Atari Lynx hardware available. Both consisted of two devices that together represented or replaced the Atari Lynx. The older and more powerful combination of devices were named `Howard` and `Howdy`, named after Howard XYZ that designed and created them. 

## Howard and Howdy hardware
`Howdy` is an almost empty Atari Lynx console that had most of the internal electronics removed. The main parts of the Lynx are present in the large case called `Howard`, which has a lot of components representing the Lynx. `Howard` adds more capabilities, such as holding internal state for development and debugging purposes. `Howard` and `Howdy` are connected to each other with cables and interface with the Amiga computer.

## Pinky and Mandy
The development hardware was later replaced with a leaner and less expensive version consisting of two parts called `Pinky` and `Mandy`. The Atari Lynx model 1 `Mandy` featured a cable connection from the cartridge slot and was connected to `Pinky`, a small motherboard inside an Atari modem case. `Pinky` included some logic on an EEPROM and RAM memory. It connected between the `Mandy` and Amiga computer and allowed games to be uploaded to `Pinky` that would mimic a cartridge. The implementation did not need the encryption on the cartridge, so developers were able to run unencrypted game binaries on real hardware.